♪Opening Song♪
[NUI]
Hey...
Boy...
Are you still alive?
[gasps]
So then, you can see mushi?
[grunts]
[NUI]
There's no need to be afraid.
Mushi like those are
merely a nuisance.
They don't really have
much influence over us.
Or perhaps...
...it's me you're afraid of?
[NUI] Drink this. It will
help with your injuries.
You can rest here
until your leg heals.
But as soon as it does,
I want you out.
[YOKI coughs]
Blech!
[YOKI]
Mom?
Mom?!
Mom!
[YOKI'S MOTHER]
Wait, this doesn't seem right.
We must've taken
the wrong road.
[YOKI]
Mom!
What is it, Yoki?
Seeing those scary
"things" again?
[YOKI]
Uh-huh.
[YOKI'S MOTHER]
Don't worry, son.
It's just your imagination
playing tricks on you.
[YOKI'S MOTHER]
It's all right.
You have to be strong, now.
[YOKI gasps]
[YOKI grunting, panting]
[gasps]
[YOKI sobs]
[NUI]
There's no need to be afraid.
[YOKI] My foot feels like
it's starting to get better.
[footsteps]
[YOKI]
Huh?
What strange looking fish.
Solid white, with green eyes.
[YOKI]
And they're all missing an eye.
[NUI] It's because of the
mushi living in the pond.
They're most active at
night and at daybreak.
It's best to stay away.
So, uh...
...these mushi, are they
some kind of spirits?
I wouldn't say that, exactly.
They're mostly energy,
but they're still
very much alive.
Just, not in the same
way you and I are.
And you say some have the
power to influence us?
They exist on a different plane,
but they're not entirely
disconnected from ours.
Think of them as the essence
of life in its many forms.
I see.
I think I understand.
[YOKI grunts]
[YOKI]
It's slow going,
but at least I can get
around without a cane now.
[NUI]
Yoki.
From what I can tell, it seems
your leg is healing nicely.
Do you have a family
you can go home to?
No, I don't. Not now, anyway.
It... It was just me and my mom,
and now that she's gone...
Besides. My foot...
It still hurts when I walk.
[NUI]
I see.
But, listen. Can we talk
about something else?
Like, maybe you could tell
me what kind of mushi
live in that pond?
[NUI]
Mm. Well...
...you might say they're
"total darkness".
"Darkness"?
[NUI]
Yes.
There are two types of darkness.
The first occurs when
you close your eyes,
or when you're outside
on a moonless night.
It's the temporary darkness.
"Total darkness", on the
other hand, is endless.
During the day, the dark
mushi sleep in the shadows.
But at night, they come out
to feed on smaller mushi.
[YOKI]
So, what was it
that made your hair
and eyes change color?
And the fish?
[NUI]
At dawn sometimes,
the surface of the
pond sparkles silver.
Most likely an effect
caused by the remains
of ingested mushi
dissolving in the water.
The change results from repeated
exposure to that light.
Yeah, but then,
aren't you worried you'll
lose your other eye
if you stay here too long?
[NUI]
You've seen the fish.
Did you notice a single
one missing both eyes?
No, this is the
extent of the change.
The sun will be setting soon.
We'd best get indoors.
But, wait a minute, do these
mushi have a name?
[NUI] The mushi which
have the characteristics
of darkness are
called tokoyami.
The mushi which causes
the silver light, however,
seem to be a separate mushi
that lives within the tokoyami.
I don't know if
that mushi has a name.
I call it "ginko".
[YOKI]
What's this one?
Inedible.
[YOKI]
Then, how 'bout this one?
Try taking a bite of it.
But don't swallow it.
Ah!
[coughing]
[YOKI]
Ew, it's hot!
--[NUI chuckles]
--[coughing continues]
It won't kill you,
but it should help toughen
your taste buds a bit.
It's awful.
[NUI]
Hm?
[YOKI]
Oh! That's strange.
They're all in a ball.
[NUI exhales]
You broke them up..
Wait. They'll ball
right back up again.
It's a common occurrence when
I walk through the mountains.
Do you think I could
give it a try?
Just don't go making
a habit of it.
[YOKI]
I won't.
[NUI] Now, it might be
a bit strong at first.
[YOKI coughs]
[NUI laughs]
[YOKI]
Hey!
Can we light the lantern?
[NUI]
Oh, sorry.
I forget; Most people
can't see in the dark.
I can.
Because of the ginko?
[NUI]
Probably.
Still, it's a convenient
ability to have.
[NUI] You know, Yoki,
when you're walking alone
through the mountains
at night,
you'll invariably
come upon places
where the moonlight
fails to reach the road
and the stars disappear behind
the branches overhead.
In the sudden darkness, it's
very easy to become disoriented.
But even though it's a
fairly common experience,
always be aware.
If it ever feels like your
memories are slipping away,
if you have trouble recalling
your name or your past,
it means the tokoyami is near.
You can escape, however,
if you can remember
just one thing.
[YOKI] But, what if I
can't remember anything?
[NUI] It doesn't matter
what you're able to recall.
Any name that pops
into your head will do.
[YOKI]
Even if it's not mine?
[NUI]
Yes, as a last resort.
Though it's said that you
won't be able to remember
what your name was
prior to that time.
[crickets chirping]
[YOKI]
Nui?
[NUI]
Hm?
[YOKI] Do you mind
if I ask, you know,
why you live here?
Sure. I can tell you.
There's a village just
beyond these mountains.
It's the place
where I was born.
It's small and isolated,
but beautiful all the same.
Unfortunately, because of
my tendency to attract mushi,
I'm unable to stay for
too long in one place.
So I became a mushi master,
traveling around from village
to village, exterminating mushi.
Still, I returned home
as often as I could
to visit with
friends and family.
And most of all, my husband
and son, who I loved...
...more than anything.
Until...
...one day, I returned to the
news that a group of villagers,
my husband, son, father,
and friends among them,
had ventured into the mountains
and never came back.
I searched for weeks,
but there was no sign of them.
When I came to
this place, though,
and realized that there were
tokoyami living in the pond,
well, I'd learned from
other mushi masters
the effects of
the tokoyami...
as well as the techniques
for avoiding them.
And so it is.
I continue to live here in
the hopes that my friends
and loved ones... are still
out there somewhere.
Wandering around.
So how long have
you been out here?
I'm not sure. Six years perhaps?
Six years, by yourself...
[YOKI]
I don't really know if your
friends and family are still
out there somewhere, but,
If they are,
well, then I-I want to
try to help you find them!
I do!
I could stay and--
You can't!
Why not?
Why won't you let me?
Because...
I have to do this alone.
It's my burden.
Don't let it consume
your life as well.
One more word about this,
and I'll have you
leave right now.
I know she's hiding something.
There's a real reason why she
doesn't want me to stay here.
Come on, tokoyami!
ginko, come out!
[YOKI gasping]
[YOKI gasps]
[YOKI]
What's happening to that fish?
Its good eye is...
[YOKI]
It disappeared...
[NUI]
Yoki!
What are you doing out here?
I told you it's not good to
be exposed to that light--!
[YOKI]
Listen...
The reason the fish
still have one eye...
...is because they disappear
when both eyes are gone.
Did... Did you know that?
[NUI]
They haven't disappeared.
The light emitted by the ginko
turns living things
into tokoyami.
It's the same thing!
If you knew, then why didn't
you do something about it?!
You're a mushi master!
Why would you even let
something that terrible exist?!
You must not let your vision
be clouded by fear and anger.
There are times when
we must simply accept
that all things serve
a larger purpose.
The cycle of life extends
beyond the world we can see,
and connects us all
in unexpected ways.
Therefore, whenever possible,
a wise mushi master chooses
understanding
over extermination.
As for me,
I've spent my time here studying
the ginko in some detail.
Unfortunately, by the
time I discovered
what ultimately
became of the fish,
I had already been exposed to
too much of the ginko's light.
I began gathering one-eyed
fish from the pond
and experimented
with various ways
to protect them
from further exposure.
However...
Once the fish started
to turn white,
while I was able to delay the
change to a certain extent,
eventually, all of them lost
both eyes and became tokoyami.
All of them?
Then, you mean...?
For a time, I refused to accept
the idea that my husband and son
had been transformed
into tokoyami.
I continued my search,
clinging to the hope that they
had somehow avoided exposure.
Then, one day, I suddenly
came to the realization.
My whole world, everything I
had ever cared about,
it was all right here.
There's nothing more for me.
But you, Yoki, if you
understand what I'm saying,
you'll leave this
place while you can.
No! I'm not just going to
let you give up like this!
--Please! Come with me!
--[NUI] Fool! Don't be absurd!
[NUI]
I'm beyond help now.
It's a fact I thought I'd come
to terms with long ago, but...
...your being here, it only
makes things difficult.
[NUI]
Please. Just go.
And don't worry,
I think life on the
road will suit you well.
Believe me, you're better off
not having a place
you call home.
I won't!
This is my home!
I've lived here longer
than anywhere else!
[NUI]
Yoki.
This place is where
the tokoyami lives.
It's where I live.
It's not a place for you.
The time...
...has finally come.
[YOKI]
The pond...
[gasps]
[YOKI]
Don't go!
Huh? Nui?
Wait!
Don't go!
Nui!
[NUI]
What have you done?
[YOKI]
Nui? Is that you?
[NUI]
Go back!
But you're--
[NUI]
It's too late for me now.
The ginko will awaken soon.
Get as far away as you can.
Come now... hurry!
[YOKI]
It's strange. Your hand.
There's no warmth, but...
but it's not cold either.
[NUI]
I know.
But your hand is still warm.
And not just your hand.
I no longer have eyes,
but when you look at me,
even now, I can feel it.
Warm, like sunshine.
After so many years
alone on that cold,
dark pond, it's good to
know that feeling again.
Now, listen Yoki.
From here on,
keep one eye closed.
You will have to sacrifice
one eye to the ginko,
in order to escape the tokoyami.
But no matter what happens,
keep your other
eye closed tightly.
You'll need it, if you're
to see the sunlight again.
Ah! The ginko!
Do as I say!
[YOKI grunts]
Nui!
[YOKI]
So, that's the ginko.
An eye-less fish that swims
in the endless darkness.
[NUI]
You must not let your vision
be clouded by fear and anger.
There are times when
we must simply accept
that all things
serve a larger purpose.
[footsteps]
[YOKI]
I-I smell dirt.
[footsteps]
[YOKI]
There's the moon again.
W-What night is this?
I can't remember
for some reason.
[YOKI]
My name.
If this happened,
what was it I was
supposed to do?
[YOKI]
The next morning...
[YOKI] ...my right eye
saw the sun again,
for what felt like
the first time.
[MAN]
Huh? Who are you?
You're not from around here.
Uh? Hey!
Hey, I'm back.
Looks like you're finally
back on your feet, huh?
[YOKI]
Mm-hm.
So, were you able to remember
anything besides your name?
Not yet.
[MAN] Well, you can stay
here as long as you need to.
If you're up to it,
I'll take you to meet the
village elder tomorrow.
[YOKI]
The only thing is...
...even in the sunlight,
the hole where my left eye
used to be is still dark,
like a bottomless pit.
And it seems to attract
these strange creatures.
[YOKI]
It's a sign maybe.
That bad luck is going to
follow me wherever I go.
That's the feeling
I get, anyway.
[MAN]
Ginko!
Dinner's ready!
[MAN]
Ginko?
Ginko!
[NARRATOR]
Next: "One-Night Bridge"